what are the military risks of an
Israeli ground offensive in Gaza the
Israeli Army says it's ready for the
next stage of its war on the strip and
it's massing hundreds of thousands of
troops but what does Israel stand to
gain from an incursion into the
territory this is Inside
[Music]
Story
hello again I'm James Bay Israel has
gathered hundreds of thousands of troops
ahead of its ground invasion of Gaza but
Hamas is likely to be ready for them
tens of thousands of Fighters have had
time to prepare traps and ambushes with
the conflict about to enter a dangerous
new phase fears are growing for
civilians caught in the crossfire along
with concern the war might spread Beyond
The Strip we'll go to our panel of
guests in just a few moments but first
Finton Monahan has this report
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu had a question for the tens of
thousands of troops masked along the
border with Gaza are you ready for what
comes next a ground Invasion appears
inevitable in the past week the Israeli
military has dropped thousands of bombs
on Gaza and Netanyahu says it's only the
beginning we are striking at our enemy
with unprecedented might I emphasize
this is just the beginning our enemies
have only begun paying the price and I
won't detail what is yet to come but I
tell you that this is only the
beginning Israel has called up as many
as 360,000 reservists swelling the
Army's ranks to three times its usual
size but the enemy is likely to be
prepared Hamas is believed to have tens
of thousands of Fighters and a complex
network of tunnels Beneath The Enclave
they're fighting on home ground and have
had time to prepare traps and
ambushes
ahead of its expected Invasion the
Israeli Army issued a forced evacuation
order for 1.1 million Palestinians in
Northern Gaza but they have nowhere to
go we couldn't leave they said leave
towards the South but there is no
Transportation the street was closed
there was a traffic jam some cars got
bombed by air
strikes this is a genocide not a war and
it's an attempt to displace the people
of the Gaza Strip but this will not
happen a ground Invasion could have
brought a repercussions for the region
following a meeting with Hamas leaders
in katar Iran's foreign Ministry warned
of far-reaching consequences if Israel
pushes ahead with the next stage of its
offensive meanwhile the US has deployed
two aircraft carriers and a host of war
planes to the Middle East President Joe
Biden has warned other nations and
groups not to get
involved let me say this as clearly as I
can this is not a moment for any party
hostile to Israel to exploit these
attacks to seek Advantage the world is
watching thousands of people on both
sides have been killed in the past week
of fighting further escalation is on the
horizon one that may go far beyond the
war zone in Gaza vinon Monahan for
Inside
[Music]
Story well let's bring in up panel of
experts to discuss this further in
Beirut we have elas Hannah a retired
Lebanese military General in Brussels
it's Elijah mager a military analyst
who's covered conflicts in the Middle
East for more than 30 years and in the
US state of Delaware Lawrence Corb a
retired US Navy captain and former
assistant Secretary of Defense uh thank
you very much for joining us I'm going
to start with you Lawrence we've got
very clear I think Israel signaling now
that this is going to happen soon the
Prime Minister said the next stage is
coming the military have put out a
statement the Israeli military there's
going to be a coordinated attack from
Air Land and Sea um let me ask you
you've you've been involved in military
planning at the highest levels in the
Pentagon what do you think they're
thinking about in terms of the timing
there are some reports that they were
planning to do it at the weekend but
it's been delayed because of Cloudy uh
conditions and they need to be able to
see things from their air
cover well I think they were good for
them from a military point of view to
delay because given the internal
problems that you've had in Israel ever
since the Prime Minister Neto took over
the military wasn't in the normal shape
in fact people weren't even showing up
for reserve duty because of their
concern what Netanyahu was doing it also
gives the United States with secretary
blinkin and secretary Austin to go
around the region to get the other
countries in the region to work with us
and the Israelis after this military
operation is over to make sure that it
doesn't uh it doesn't happen again the
real question is what how long will it
take how much damage will it do and when
will the Israelis uh stop it what will
be the role of Egypt will they allow uh
the hostages and some of the the people
from Gaza to come in so that we minimize
civilian
casualties okay Elijah of course the
thing we don't know is exactly what the
Israelis are planning to do we don't
know the end game here we don't think
it's going to be another limited
incursion uh prime minister Netanyahu
has gone on record every Hamas member is
a dead man what do you think they are
probably planning on this
occasion thank you for having me first
of all I think that the question of
whether it's just an excuse we've seen
in 2006 when Israel decided to attack
Lebanon it took them two weeks to
organize themselves and call upon the
reservist and they were very hesitant to
walk into Lebanon and they were not
successful in achieving their objectives
here we're talking about reservice that
coming from all over the places we're
talking about
300,000 that are divided on two
different fronts plus the reserve under
the command of the general Commander uh
in case one front needs more than the
other because in my opinion there is
going to be definitely a second front
and we will see that in the next 2472
hours thirdly the Israelis are walking
into a trap and they know it the
Israelis are very good in their Air
Force they can destroy we've seen what
they have done in Gaza they can level
the city but they can not guarantee a
success of the
Infantry at the end of the day it is not
that air for that going to occupy Street
by street fighting in urban city is not
a common ad is something extremely
challenging even to the Israeli armies
we've seen the consequences in
2014 and we understand that the Israelis
will receive a heavily damage on all
their soldiers and again I repeat
if other fronts are not starting and I
think that will be visible very soon
Ellas Elijah there mentioned 2014 Israel
lost 67 soldiers then um tell us in your
view how the two sides Stack Up in terms
of their their military forces clearly
Israel has huge numbers involved they've
called up 360,000 reservists how do you
see the two military forces that that
potentially are going to face each other
uh the balance of power is in Israel
favor however the characteristic of this
war is totally different from 2006 and
2014 if you are planning to go into Gaza
for an urban Warfare I mean you have to
really Define what is the end goal what
is the goal at what time you feel that
you have really achieved your goal um
Netanyahu is so maximalist he want
destroy all of Hamas would he be able to
really destroy all of Hamas so I think
that there is three dynamics that is
really playing in this game first the
political Dynamics the military Dynamics
the Readiness of
this idef Army Israeli Army are they
ready really do they have all means in
order to go into Gaza what would be the
plan I mean the operational plan would
they go and cut and compart malize you
know this dissect Gaza into sectors what
would be after at what time they think
that it is you know they have achieve
their goal moreover you are talking we
have to take into consideration the
regional aspect the regional Dynamics
what would happen at the Lebanese front
which is you so it's becoming hotter and
hotter and then after all of that the
the the global Dynamics which is really
led by the United States of America it's
like protecting this operation to a
certain degree you know that I think
that the Americans have decided at what
degree they will stop the war in order
to really open up for diplomacy at that
time moreover the herculan uh problem
herculan task for the Israeli Army is to
go into something not really aware of
they don't have the situational
awareness in an urban Warfare the ratio
is totally different from defense and
offense usually between two regular
armies one Defender against three
attacker in this kind of uh urban area
maybe you have to have one overturn
would Israel be able and accept such
kind of
casualties Lawrence let me ask you about
that about the about Gaza as it stands
now which will become potentially the
battlefield if we have this ground um
intervention you have potentially
snipers nks m traps minefields IEDs
suicide bombers um one military person I
saw say that parts of Gaza now look like
Stalingrad and Hamas have all sorts of
capabilities some we might not know
about for example drones quadcopters
capable of drop dropping bombs all those
sort of things I mean um if you were a
military planner you'd be very wary
wouldn't you right now well no doubt
about it because as my colleagues have
mentioned Urban Warfare as opposed to
air and see you're going to have more
casualties I have no doubt that Hamas is
putting its forces in civilian areas
including hospitals and so you even if
you try and limit the damage which I
think the Israelis will you can't do it
uh completely and the real question
becomes if you have all of these
civilian casualties what is the reaction
from the United States and uh Israel's
other allies around around the world and
yes that's going to be difficult because
traditionally the Israelis have suffer
very few casualties going back all the
way to the yam kapor War so I think this
is going to also be a struggle you know
for the uh for the go for the government
there fortunately they have a Unity
government so that should enable them to
keep going but I do think they better be
prepared to take a lot of casualties and
the world needs to be prepared for a lot
of Civilian casualties because uh Hamas
is going to embed themselves with the
the normal people and hospitals and
apartment houses and
stores so picking up on what Lawrence
said Elijah do you think Hamas
potentially have the psychological
advantage here Israeli troops perhaps C
cautious after what happened on October
the 7th they saw hamas's tactics they
saw their plan they saw their
capabilities and of course in that
attack Israel lost a lot of proved that
Israel's intelligence wasn't good but
they also lost a lot of their sensors
and cameras around Gaza well let us look
at the goal of this objective the
objective of this separation first of
all it is not to DET deter Hamas because
it is a completely different objective
because of this war because of the
sismic shift
in the Israeli public confidence in
their military there is a huge
uncertainty for the people of Israel
this is why the Israelis are going into
this war with a very low Spirit only to
impose deterence again and to give trust
to the
population that they have lost and
questioning the effectiveness of their
Armed Forces so starting we have Hamas
with a very High Spirit in comparison to
the Israeli army with a very low Spirit
to go into Gaza secondly and most
importantly we have seen every time
Israel Wag war on Hamas Hamas became
stronger it is exactly the same thing
when Israel waged war on Hezbollah and
Hezbollah became such a strong non-state
actor that today the Israelis need the
support of The Americans to keep it on
the side it's not going to stay on the
side so we see the Israelis instead of
deter Hamas and Destroy
Hamas on every war Hamas becoming
stronger Hamas doesn't need to hide
behind the civilians because the
Israelis already are taking care of
killing the civilians we have 8,800
wounded most of them civilians we have
2,800 killed most of them civilians so
the Israeli are pretty good in targeting
civilians and killing them because they
are fighting and
bombing using a quarter of a nuclear
bomb on the city in only five to six
days nobody can use such a Firepower but
the Israelis and if they have confidence
why they need to level the whole city
where they want to go in it's because
they are afraid so starting before the
beginning of the operation they are
losing it alas um you just heard Elijah
there talking about the Firepower that
been used um 6,000 bombs in 6 days we
haven't had an update from the Israelis
since then but that's more than the US
dropped on the Syrian city of raka
during The Siege which lasted months and
it's more than the US used in
Afghanistan in an in an entire
year yeah 7,000
7,800 no I mean you have to I mean let
me tell you something Israel is in big
dilemma big problem uh Israel is
fighting non-state act in 19 in 2006 the
United States of America wanted the
greater Middle East the new Middle East
and then they gave the green light for
Israel to
attack for 33 days they didn't lose but
there is the formula that hasah has won
because it didn't lose and Israel lost
because it didn't win
uh Israel cannot really repeat what's
happening today with Hamas because after
the the flood of ala and this
spectacular low Tech versus Hightech
Israel cannot really lose against Hamas
it's an imperative to destroy Hamas and
here comes the big dilemma why because
Israel prepares itself for different
kind of warfare never fought in cities I
remember I do remember in 1982 when they
inv Lebanon they inir tire and then go
straight to sidon and inir sidon and
then went directly to to Beirut and when
they try to to enter Beirut they have
failed so I mean fighting in cities is
so difficult according to you know suu
as you said so the Dilemma of of Israel
what would be the end game is it to
destroy or minimize or you know uh
degrade the capability of Hamas so they
have to do something otherwise I mean it
will be
definitively uh uh taken you would no
nobody in the region I mean would take
Israel as deterrent power as great power
militarily speaking if you imagine I
mean if you go and you know rebuild the
scenario U of flood of Alexa I mean it's
low Tech High Tech surprise uh speed
it's a blitz cre and I think that Hamas
have really plan for different scenarios
if they had succeeded with the flood of
ala what would happen I I think they
they were prepared they were preparing
for or they have prepared for all
scenarios possible including one of
invasion from the Israelis and to the
Gaza Lawrence uh let me bring in another
factor and it's more than a factor
because it's very human and that's the
captives that are being held by Hamas
right now in Gaza does that make do you
think this operation much more difficult
for the Israelis and of course we're
talking about a 100 or so people but
they're not all Israelis some of them
are foreign Nationals there are US
citizens French citizens UK citizens
some of um some of Israel's close allies
have a stake in all of this well that
certainly does make it more difficult if
what the real question is will do the
Israelis have the intelligence to know
where those hostages are compared to
trying undermine the military capability
of Hamas and I assume that Hamas is
spreading them out all throughout the
region so that no matter where the
Israelis go to try and eliminate Hamas
and their military capability they're
going to be endangering hostages there's
no doubt about the fact they will do
that and that of course will have an
impact on opinion around the world
including in the uh in the in the United
States so that's makes this very
difficult is Israel has the capability
to do it the real question is are they
prepared to pay the cost both in terms
of lives and in their uh uh the
perception of them around the world
certainly Elijah it looks right now as
though Israel has the gloves off we've
talked about the number of bombs that
have been dropped this time around
they're not doing what they used to call
the roof knocks low intensity strike as
a warning they're just warning entire
areas and we're hearing and I'll quote
this because it's from The New York
Times apparently for the ground
offensive uh they're going to have new
military Rules of Engagement they've
been loosened to allow soldiers to make
fewer checks before shooting at
suspected enemies this is going to lead
to a massive death toll is it
not obviously because they also have the
Hannibal directive where they can kill
their own soldiers if they are in
captivity
and if they are found taken away by the
militant so they prefer to negotiate
later on over the body rather than a
soldier that is alive however I would
like to say something we've seen
Netanyahu in power for the last 15 years
and we still have jalad charit in
captivity and he did not negotiate for
his release so negotiating at the end of
the day for 100 plus uh soldiers
officers or civilians he knows that he
had to release all the Palestinian
soldiers all the Palestinian prisoners
if the Hamas and the Jihad has 10 or
have 200 so the number is becoming
relative at the end of the day and for
having these hostages or these prisoners
killed during the battle is not going to
affect a lot the Americans and all the
other National and nationalities because
already the approval of the American for
a ground offensive is taking into
account the death or the killing of
their National I think Hamas and the
Jihad prefer to have them alive because
it's always have we have seen in the
negotiation of hostages between the
Palestinian and the Lebanese and the
Israelis is always better to have a
hostage that is alive rather than dead
nevertheless with this War I think the
Israelis are going to have a rule of
Engagement where there is no mercy
because we've seen how the Air Force is
behaving with the civilians and with
Gaza therefore I don't think the Israeli
Army that in term of peace is behaving
heavily with a very heavy hand on the
Palestinian
civilians is going to have mercy on
anything that is moving particularly
when the level of tension is extremely
high among the Israelis that for some
birds migrating from one country to
another they rate the alarm all over
Israel and they are in really high
tension and they have shot against each
other when they were trying to repair
electricity or group that are not
coordinating because there is a high
tension so when they're going to walk in
the city of 1.3 million in the north and
1 million in the South they're going to
go for the smaller area and the narrower
area that is in the north and they're
going to walk in the city where they
know under every debris there is a trap
I've seen that in the camon battle in
Syria because this is where I was
present and I've seen how sniper put
themself really at the bottom of the
building not on the top and they managed
to kill many of the fighters is trying
to occupy the city so there is a large
experience today we're talking about
among the Hamas Fighters and militant in
the city where they have gained so much
experience in previous Wars and they
know how to fight in urban city but the
Israelis don't and we've seen them in
2006 in this in the South Lebanon how
they really were forced to withdraw
under the head of the gorilla Warfare
that are not they not used to on the
contrary the Israeli Special Forces know
how to have to
fight this kind of War but Israel has
enough Special Forces to push in Hamas
in Gaza of course not okay um elas um if
we look already and we've only had a
week of this bombardment the death toll
of Palestinian civilians is now more
than 2014 and that War last Ed for 50
days I've seen one analyst saying the
civilian death toll could equal the
battle against isil and mosul where
there's estimated to be 9,000 to 11,000
dead how worried are you about a vast
civilian casualty rate here I am deeply
worried because uh for Israel to achieve
its goal they have to go inside going
inside they have to bombard I mean
especially the city of Gaza where they
have like
750,000 people and according to the
Israeli sources they say that most of
the ground underground tunnels where the
hamas's commanders and leaders are
really hiding
in below the shifa hospital so I mean in
order to really calculate or Define the
victory or the theory of Victory when
you do stop and saying I did I do really
achieved my goals if Hamas say no
because you have left nothing to Hamas
to say because you are going as in the
World War II unconditional surrender
we're talking about surrender now we are
talking about destroying all of Hamas
how can you really destroy all of Hamas
that is really spreading all
over Gaza and you are trying to change
the population the density of population
and we do remember in the urban Warfare
the there three elements that play
really in the output of any war in in in
the city uh demography topography and
geography and the cities they do have
the special geography and topography
they change they change the the
landscape the building they change the
landscape they make it different maybe
maybe we can say on a city it is like
the urban welfare is the most the best
equalizer between the balance of power
it doesn't matter let me just let me
just bring in Lawrence at the end
because I we we've seen now I think
Western countries were fully behind
Israel beginning to be a bit of a a
splintering some really calling very
strongly for restraint what do you think
could be a break on the Israelis if we
do have mass civilian casualties is it
really only US public opinion and the
White House in the end well I think
whatever side the White House is will be
the key these other nations and
international organizations are already
coming out against the casualties that
have been caused just by the bombing so
the real question is what role will the
United States play I assume that
secretary blink going around now to the
other countries in the region is working
with them to come up with some way to
deal with this situation which is
inevitable once they send in ground
forces as my colleagues have mentioned
there's going to be an awful lot of
casualties a lot of innocent people
Israel says their objective is to
completely eliminate Hamas not just
their capability to eliminate them
completely that is a very very difficult
goal for them to achieve in a reasonable
amount of time and with a reasonable
amount of deaths both to the civilians
and to the Israeli forces thank you
Lawrence and thank you to our panel for
their military and political analysis
today elas Hannah Elijah mager and
Lawrence Corb if you didn't catch all of
the program you can find it on our
website al.com if you have comments on
our discussion we want to hear from you
go to our Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insidestory and on X
the one that used to be called Twitter
we're at AJ Inside Story stay tuned for
alzer's comprehensive coverage of the
Gaza war from me James Bay and the team
bye for
now